 Gaslight Investors Planned Unit Development Project | East Grand Rapids, MI - Official Website Skip to Main Content Home About EGR Gaslight Investors Gaslight Investors Planned Unit Development Project Gaslight Investors Planned Unit Development (PUD) is a mixed use proposal that was approved in 2004 but has been only partially constructed. Gaslight Investors submitted a new concept plan in late 2024 to update the existing concept plan for the remainder of the development. On October 6, 2025, the East Grand Rapids City Commission voted 4-3 to approve a revised concept plan for the PUD. A subsequent court decision by a Kent County Circuit Court Judge voided that vote. The court ruled that a protest petition filed by a group of residents was valid and required 5 votes for approval, not 4. At this time developer has not indicated to the City as to how or if it is going to proceed. Overview In May 2024, the Gaslight Investors LLC applied for a site plan revision at 2255 Wealthy St. and 515 Lakeside Drive SE. This area was originally approved for development in 2004 as the Jade Pig Planned Unit Development, but construction stalled after the first phase was completed in 2005. An amendment to this original plan was considered in 2008, but no construction took place during the Great Recession. A revised concept plan for the site was introduced to the Planning Commission in 2020, but the plan never advanced due to the global pandemic. After numerous discussions, reviews and public and Commission input, Gaslight Investors LLC presented a revised concept plan to City Commission in August 2025 . This concept plan was then approved by City Commission at its Oct. 6, 2025 meeting . The current concept plan seeks to redevelop an 8.6-acre site into a mixed-use residential and commercial space, including a parking garage. The concept plan includes: Six total buildings, including: One parking structure Three mixed-use buildings Three residential buildings 147 residential units, including condos, apartments and townhomes. 493 total parking spaces Timeline Current stage: The concept plan has been reviewed and approved by City Commission at its Oct. 6 meeting. The development now enters the final plan stage , where more details, including building materials, architectural style, number of bedrooms per unit and detailed traffic and pedestrian safety features will be added to the plan. Once Gaslight Investors comes back to the City with these details, the final plan will go to both the Planning Commission and City Commission for discussion, public input opportunities and feedback. The City anticipates this will occur sometime in 2026. Because a development of this scope requires multiple stages of review, community input, study, approvals and revisions, this anticipated timeline may take longer. Community Input Opportunities Community members are welcome to provide input regarding this project by: City of East Grand Rapids residents: Emailing their City Commissioner Community members: Emailing input@eastgrmi.gov . Community members can also sign up for email and text alerts . FAQs What is the scope of this project? This project proposes the development of an 8.6-acre site at 2255 Wealthy St. and 515 Lakeside Drive SE into a mixed-use residential and commercial space and parking garage. The development would include: Six total buildings, including: One parking structure Three mixed-use buildings Three residential buildings 147 residential units , including condos, apartments and townhomes. 493 total parking spaces Will there be an attainable housing provision in the new residential development? The final mix of rental and owner-occupied units and the distribution of unit sizes will be determined during the final plan review. The developer has proposed approximately 10% of residential units as attainable rental units, with rents based on 100-120% of Kent County’s Area Median Income. Final numbers will be confirmed in the last review stage. How will traffic and pedestrian safety be managed? The developer has submitted a preliminary traffic analysis that has been reviewed by the City’s consultants, which shows the City’s transportation system can handle the proposed development. If approved, the main access road will be rerouted to improve traffic management. After finalizing building locations and uses in the final review stage, an additional traffic impact study will determine changes needed for streets and traffic control devices to manage new traffic. Bicycle and pedestrian accommodations are also part of the plan. For more information regarding the City’s traffic and pedestrian safety initiatives, visit the traffic webpage . How many parking spaces are in the concept plan? The current concept plan includes 493 parking spaces. In the final review stage, parking and traffic studies will further guide decisions. What is the proposed housing density? The current concept plan proposes 147 units. How tall will the buildings be? In the current concept plan, the tallest building is 70 feet — a significant reduction in height compared to the original plan (94 feet). What will the buildings look like? Architectural style, materials and overall visual character are unknown at this time and will be discussed in the final approval stage. How can I provide feedback? Community members can provide feedback by emailing the City at input@eastgrmi.gov . What is the approval process? As a major change to the previously approved PUD plan and agreement, Gaslight Investors is required to proceed through the entire PUD approval process for this revised plan. The concept plan stage involves two sets of hearings at the Planning Commission and City Commission levels. The PUD concept plan stage is solely for review of the overall concept plan. The concept plan is intended to show the basic layout of proposed buildings, streets and other important elements that illustrate the intended vision for the site. The purpose of a concept plan approval is to give the applicants reasonable assurance that their proposed concept is viewed favorably so that the final site plan and detail designs can be produced with confidence. The final plan stage involves more detailed designs and requirements, including a legal PUD agreement, are considered. Final building designs, floor plans and details such as building materials, amenities and specific tenants or occupants are discussed and reviewed at this stage. The final site plan will be judged against the approved concept plan to ensure it remains in general compliance with what the City Commission approves. The Planning Commission may make suggestions or recommendations regarding elements they would like to see in the final plan, but these are not required to be presented or approved at this stage. Currently, the project is in the final plan stage, after City Commission voted to approve the concept plan at its Oct. 6, 2025 meeting . Once the developer comes back to the City with the final plan, it will go through both the Planning Commission and City Commission for review, discussion and opportunities for public input. To get notified of any updates, follow the City on Facebook and sign up to receive email and text notifications . Document Center June, 11 2024 Planning Commission Introduction July 9, 2024 Planning Commission Supplemental Material Jan. 21, 2025 City Commission Introduction Feb. 17, 2025 Public Hearing March 21, 2025: Revised Gaslight Investors Concept Plan April 16, 2025: Revised Gaslight Investors Concept Plan July 11, 2025: Revised PUD Amendment Memo July 11, 2025: Updated FAQs Aug. 27, 2025: Revised Gaslight Investors Concept Plan Sept. 2, 2025: City Commission meeting supplemental materials Studies, Analyses and Summaries of Public Comment Traffic and parking studies Fleis and Vandenbrink (developer) Response from Progressive Companies (City consultant) Jeremy Chapman Christopher Zull (April 2025) Christopher Zull (Sept. 2025) Preliminary environmental assessment (City consultant) Preliminary soils assessment (City consultant) Preliminary utilities analysis (by City) Feedback from Cascade Township Building Inspection Services Feedback from EGR Public Safety Summary of public comment from previous City Commission meeting agendas May 5 May 19 June 2 June 16 July 21 Aug. 4 Aug. 18 Sept. 2 Sept. 15 FAQs Government Websites by CivicPlus® Loading Loading Do Not Show Again Close Arrow Left Arrow Right [] Slideshow Left Arrow Slideshow Right Arrow 