EAST GRAND RAPIDS
MASTER PLAN AMENDMENT 2026




                             1
                  Acknowledgements
Preparation of this Master Plan amendment was made possible by the
active participation of the citizens of East Grand Rapids and, in particular,
the residents and business owners within the planning subareas. Special
thanks to the members of the Planning Commission for their thoughtful
guidance, the City Commission for their valuable input, and City staff for
their hands-on assistance throughout the process.

City Commission
Katie Favale, Mayor
Ryan Burdick
Abbie Groff-Blaszak
Bradley Hunter
Laura Schwartz
Kate Skaggs
Chris Wessely

Planning Commission
Mary Mapes, Chair
Brian Miller, Vice Chair
Matt Feyen, Secretary
Steve Achram
Greg Metz
Peter Michell
Christopher Rosmarin
Laura Schwartz
Thomas Tilma

City Staff
Shea Charles, City Manager
Doug LaFave, Deputy City Manager
Jay Gianotti, AICP, Zoning Administrator
            Table of Contents

Introduction ……………………………………………………………… 1

Perspective ………………………………………………………………. 3

Assets and Challenges ……………………………………………… 8

Vision and Goals …………………………………………………….. 12

Subareas …………………………………………………………………. 13

Recommendations ………………………………………………….. 26

Zoning Plan ……………………………………………………………. 27
                               Introduction
Purpose
     East Grand Rapids has a long history of proactive planning to guide the development and
     continued sustainability of the community. In addition to City-wide master plans, more focused
     plans have been regularly prepared and updated for parks and recreation, transportation,
     mobility, and utilities.

     The most recent City-wide Master Plan was adopted in 2018. During the intervening years since
     then, the City Commission, Planning Commission, and staﬀ have diligently pursued
     implementation of the Plan’s goals and recommendations. While much has been accomplished in
     a few years, more needs to be done to address remaining issues, new challenges, and emerging
     opportunities.

     As an essentially built-out City, East Grand Rapids is a stable community comprised primarily of
     attractive residential neighborhoods. Pride in these areas is evident by the many renovation,
     remodeling, and new construction projects routinely occurring throughout the City. Yet some
     challenges do exist and warrant focused consideration. This Master Plan amendment, therefore,
     doesn’t reexamine the entire City, but builds upon the foundation created by the 2018 Master
     Plan as a supplement to that Plan. It focuses on speciﬁc neighborhoods that due to age, changes
     in conditions, or unanticipated opportunities merit more detailed attention. More recent
     demographic data are also incorporated to highlight changes in the City that reveal important
     trends and distinguish East Grand Rapids from communities locally and across the nation.

Summary of Process
     Consistent with the City’s tradition of transparency and community involvement, the process of
     preparing this supplement relied heavily on input from the community-at-large and the
     stakeholders most directly aﬀected within the subareas. Individual interviews were conducted;
     an interactive project website was created; a public opinion survey was posted which received
     over 600 responses from throughout the City; comments were sought regarding each of the
     individual subareas; and neighborhood meetings were held to further elicit input as planning
     concepts were formulated.

     Results of the public engagement eﬀorts were shared with the Planning Commission and City
     Commission. During several work sessions, the Planning Commission set new planning goals and
     reviewed, discussed, and reﬁned potential land use options.

     Subsequently, a draft document was presented at a public hearing; further reﬁnements were
     made; and the Plan was adopted by both the Planning Commission and City Commission.

Relationship with Other Plans
     While this Plan amendment is primarily focused on speciﬁc subareas, other critical elements of
     the City’s development, character, and services were not ignored. East Grand Rapids continually
     plans for the development, expansion, and maintenance of its infrastructure. For example, every
     ﬁve years a new Parks & Recreation Plan is prepared to examine the adequacy and availability of
     such facilities throughout the City. A Mobility-Bike Action Plan was adopted in 2021 identifying a




                                                                                                     1
list of improvements and new routes along with priorities for action. The City is also actively
engaged in an on-going Sustainability Program toward achieving carbon neutrality for City
facilities with the adoption of a Climate Action Plan. Information and recommendations from
those plans have been relied on to provide guidance for this Master Plan amendment. Other
plans, such as The Rapid’s Transit Master Plan, were also consulted.




                                                                                             2
                               Perspective
Community Proﬁle
    Despite being a mature, built-out community, East Grand Rapids remains vibrant. Recent
    population estimates from the US Census Bureau indicate that the City has experienced nearly
    seven percent growth since its 2010 low, rising from 10,694 to 11,394. Increases like this are
    unusual for mature, inner ring cities which typically remain stable, at best, or experience
    population declines.

    Other demographic data oﬀer clues to this population uptick. Since 2010, the median age has
    steadily declined and the average household size has increased, trends that also run contrary to
    what has occurred in most mature cities across the nation. Younger families are moving into the
    community, oﬀsetting the growth of the 65 and older population which, also contrary to national
    trends, is relatively low at 11 percent of the total population compared to the national
    percentage of 17.7 percent.

     East Grand Rapids Trends 2010 - 2023
                                         Population and Housing Changes
     Factors                                                                          % Change
                               2010              2020                2023*
                                                                                      2010-2023
     Population                10,694            11,371               11,394            + 6.5
     Median Age                 38.1              37.7                 37.0             - 2.9
     Persons ≥ 65 Yrs.          8.9 %            10.6 %               11.0 %           + 23.6
     Median HH Income          99,489           145,000              168,487           + 69.4
     Median Hsg. Value        249,100           409,200              502,000          + 100.01
     Median Rent               1,043             1,636                1,845            + 77.0
     Avg. HH Size               2.85              2.90                 2.98             + 4.5
    * Census estimates

    A comparison with other nearby, economically comparable metro area communities and Kent
    County also adds perspective to how East Grand Rapids fares.

    2023 US Census Estimate - Comparisons
                           East Grand                     Cascade         Grand
                                           Ada Twp.                                   Kent County
                             Rapids                         Twp.        Rapids Twp.
    Population               11,394         14,413         19,701            18,934     661,354
    Median Age                37.0           42.8           43.2              41.4        36.5
    Persons
                             11.0 %         16.5 %         17.8 %            19.1 %      15.4 %
    ≥ 65 Yrs.
    Median HH Income        $168,487       $171,047       $133,401        $121,328      $79,756
    Median Housing
                            $502,000       $532,800       $469,600        $420,500      $309,900
    Value
    Median Monthly Rent      $1,845         $2,245         $1,739            $1,584      $1,270
    Owner Occupancy          94.3 %         94.3 %         90.2 %            85.4 %      70.5 %
    Persons/HH                2.98           2.83           2.72              2.58        2.56




                                                                                                    3
    These data show that East Grand Rapids has a:
        • younger population than the other communities and comparable to Kent County
        • greater household size than the other communities
        • much lower proportion of 65+ residents than all, including Kent County
        • very high proportion of owner-occupied dwellings, tied with Ada
        • median income second to Ada and substantially higher than all others
        • median housing value and monthly rent higher than all, except Ada

     These data run counter to a common perception that East Grand Rapids is an aging community
     unable to attract and keep young families. It is also worth noting that the three comparison
     communities are townships with substantial land area available for new development, with large
     areas devoted to commercial and employment oﬀerings, and served by highly regarded school
     systems – factors that would typically attract young families. The reputation of the East Grand
     Rapids school system and the “walkability” of the City are likely reasons for EGR’s continued
     attractiveness to younger families.

Infrastructure
     East Grand Rapids has an established infrastructure of facilities and services supporting its
     resident population and business center. The availability of such facilities and services is
     important to the vitality, sustainability, and desirability of the community and has been cited
     among the main reasons for living here.

     Mobility.
     Widely known
     for            its
     walkability and
     active lifestyle,
     the City boasts a
     network         of
     sidewalks
     throughout
     most of its
     neighborhoods
     and is actively
     expanding its
     accommodation
     for     bicyclists
     and other non-
     motorized
     enthusiasts via
     designated bike
     lanes and expanded pathways.

     However, while those seeking an active lifestyle have many options from which to choose,
     opportunities for those with physical disabilities or age-related disorders may not be as
     widespread. It is essential that barriers to navigating the pedestrian environment, including
     obstacles, uneven surfaces, street crossings, slopes and ramps, continue to be addressed to
     increase safety and expand mobility opportunities for all.



                                                                                                  4
   Transit service oﬀers another mobility option to commuters, shoppers, and students. The Rapid
   serves the City with two bus routes, one of which follows Breton and Wealthy Streets through the
   Eastown neighborhood and Gaslight Village. The other route serves the southwest quadrant of
   the City along Breton, Boston, Plymouth, and Hall Streets.

    Recreation. Parks,
    playgrounds, ball
    ﬁelds, open spaces,
    and natural areas
    abound, oﬀering a
    full range of leisure
    pursuits.       Some
    facilities are in
    conjunction      with
    the City’s schools,
    while most others
    surround        Reeds
    Lake, which is in
    itself    a    valued
    recreational      and
    scenic       amenity.
    While there is a
    relative abundance
    of these facilities,
    they tend to be
    concentrated in the
    City’s      northeast
    quadrant. Except
    for the playgrounds,
    courts, and ball ﬁelds available at the various schools, no city parks are found in the western third
    of the City and only one is located in the City’s southern half.

    Schools. The East Grand Rapids school system ranks among the top 25 school districts in the
    State of Michigan and is a major draw for many residents. Campuses for both the high school and
    middle school are located in the heart of the City close to the Gaslight Village business district
    and Reeds Lake. Three elementary schools are dispersed throughout the community.
    According to the community opinion survey conducted for this Plan, “quality schools” ranked as
    the number one reason why people chose East Grand Rapids as their place of residence.

Community Engagement
    Over 600 people from throughout the City, responded to the opinion survey on the Master Plan
    website. Additional opportunity was available to offer comments specific to each of the four
    individual subareas identified in the planning effort. Potential redevelopment options for two of
    those areas were also posted to elicit further comments and ideas. That input is discussed in the
    Subarea Chapter.




                                                                                                       5
In    the     community
survey, when asked why
residents chose to live in
East Grand Rapids, the
most            frequent
                                  Quality Schools
responses,            not
surprisingly,       were           Close to Work
“schools”             and
                              Near Family/Friends
“walkability”. Similarly,
the      most      prized         Low Crime Rate
qualities           were
“community”,                          Walkability

“schools”, “walkability”,           Recreational
and “safety”.                         Amenities
                                           Other

However, when asked
what residents liked
least about the City, in one form or another “taxes”, “housing cost”, “traﬃc”, and “lack of
diversity” were cited most frequently. The most serious issues, in order of ranking, were: “cost of
housing”, “enforcement of traﬃc laws”, “lack of nearby shopping and services”, “property
maintenance”, and “lack of housing options”.

Despite the level of activity in Gaslight Village, respondents described the district as “tired” and




                                                                                                   6
“lacking shopping opportunities”. They also identiﬁed businesses that are desired. The top ﬁve
were: “high-quality sit down restaurant”, “coﬀee shop”, “pharmacy”, “hardware store”, and
“clothing store”.

When asked what type
of     housing      the
respondent        would
choose if they moved
from their current            Smaller Single-family
                                                                 33.6 %
                                             home
residence, nearly two-
thirds (60.1 percent)
                               Larger Single-family
                                             home
                                                                 39.9 %
chose “smaller single-                  Townhome
family           home”,                    Duplex
“townhome”,
“apartment            or        Apartment/Condo
                                                            26.5 %
condominium”,                  Accessory Dwelling
“accessory dwelling”,                          Unit
                                       Retirement
or          “retirement                Community
community”.        More                      Other
than one-quarter (26.5
percent)      of     all
respondents would seek options other than a single- family home. However, approximately 44
percent of all respondents stated they would move out of East Grand Rapids if they left their
current residence, citing “taxes” and “children no longer in school” as the two principal reasons.




                                                                                                7
                         Assets and Challenges
     East Grand Rapids enjoys an enviable reputation as a vibrant residential community whose many
     assets create a healthy, safe, small town environment.

     The opinion survey conducted in conjunction with this planning eﬀort conﬁrmed the
     importance of some of the City’s strengths and identiﬁed others. Among its most notable assets
     are its schools, ranked in the top 25 school systems in Michigan. In the opinion survey, “quality
     schools” was cited most often as the reason for living in EGR.

     “Walkability” came in a close second as the reason for living in the City. This is easy to
     understand when considering the network of sidewalks available throughout the City and the
     pathways and trails within City’s parks and open spaces. On any given day people can be seen
     in all parts of the community walking dogs, strolling with friends, accompanying children to
     school, and running.

     While the sidewalks and pathways provide the infrastructure for walking, the neighborhoods
     themselves create an inviting environment. The City’s neighborhoods are generally
     characterized by mature, well-maintained homes (some dating from the early 1900s), tall trees
     lining the streets, and manicured lawns.

     Other attributes that enhance the quality of life and make East Grand Rapids distinctive include
     its two lakes that occupy much of the northern part of the City. Reeds Lake, in particular, is a
     unique feature in the heart of the community, oﬀering recreational opportunities, remarkable
     views, space for public events, and a tranquil place to relax. Located nearly adjacent to Reeds
     Lake, the Gaslight Village business district oﬀers a variety of shops, restaurants, and services in
     an inviting and walkable setting. The proximity of Gaslight Village to Reeds Lake and its adjacent
     Collins Park also creates a reciprocal relationship that encourages mutually supportive
     interaction between the two destinations.

     Though the City possesses many attractions, like other communities it is not without its
     challenges. Frequent concerns expressed by the public and from analysis of available data
     include:


Housing Cost
     Understandably, the cost of housing in the City is a signiﬁcant concern as it is throughout the
     country. According to the most recent estimates released by the US Census Bureau, the median
     housing value in East Grand Rapids in 2023 was $500,200, a 100 percent increase from the 2010
     value of $249,100. In contrast, Kent County’s median value in 2023 was less than two-thirds
     that of the City’s ($309,900 vs. $500,200) and only increased by 28 percent from 2010.

     In addition, many respondents to the Plan’s opinion survey noted that moving to another home
     within East Grand Rapids was not an option due to the escalated property taxes that would
     result when a home is sold and reassessed.




                                                                                                       8
Traﬃc Safety
     As a predominantly residential community, the creation of any major thoroughfares through East
     Grand Rapids has been avoided. Speed limits are set at 25 mph, and streets are conﬁned to two
     lanes with a few exceptions at major intersections. However, frustration was repeatedly
     expressed by survey respondents with the perceived lack of enforcement of speed limits and the
     conﬂicts between vehicles and pedestrians/cyclists.

     The City also intends to work with a consultant in the near future with respect to a review of the
     Department of Public Safety which will also include traffic enforcement.

     To view the Department of Public Safety reports and data, please use the adjacent QR code.




     An ambitious program of expanding bike lanes and pathways is also being instituted throughout
     the City to improve mobility and increase safety. Recommendations from the Mobility-Bike
     Action Plan are being implemented to expand the network of enhanced facilities for all road
     users. To accomplish this, a shift from low utilization/convenient on-street parking will need to
     give way to a focus on dedicated facilities for bikes. The city has already implemented several
     bike network changes including dedicated bike lanes, advisory bike lanes, and a shadow network.
     Eﬀorts to build out the remaining network that was called for by the community is underway.

     Other measures designed to accommodate non-motorized traﬃc and reduce conﬂicts are being
     explored.

Commercial Opportunities
     While the Gaslight Village business district appears to be thriving, many survey respondents cited
     the need for more options. A desire for high quality sit-down restaurants was frequently
     expressed. Breakfast and lunch restaurants were also noted as desirable. Additionally,
     pharmacy, convenience, hardware, and clothing retailers ranked high among the requested
     businesses. Added commercial space in the proposed planned development is expected to
     address such expressed needs. Even current merchants have voiced a desire to have more
     businesses in the district to draw additional visitors.

     Another often-cited concern focused on the existing Gaslight/D&W Plaza and its relationship to
     the remainder of Gaslight Village. Despite the fact that D&W is a signiﬁcant anchor store and the
     200 plus space parking lot serves the entire business district, public sentiment favors




                                                                                                     9
     improvement. The Plaza’s suburban strip center character was frequently noted as being out of
     place, as is the expansive parking lot fronting Wealthy Street. Many respondents commented
     about the “tired” image of the plaza in general.


Lack of Diversity
    Many survey respondents perceive East Grand Rapids as lacking diversity in two ways that are,
    in part, interconnected…socio-economic and housing. Frequent social comments included
    terms such as “entitled”, “homogeneous”, “pretentious”, “insular”, and “elitist”.

    With respect to housing, the opinion survey showed that over one-quarter of all respondents
    would choose a housing type other than a single-family home. Condominiums, townhouses,
    senior living, or apartments were cited as their next residence. However, nearly half of the
    respondents said they would move out of the City, citing children no longer in school, taxes,
    housing aﬀordability, and/or unavailable housing options as the reasons for such a decision.


Age of Housing Stock
     In addition to the lack of alternative housing choices, the City’s housing stock is old. According
     to the US Census estimates, 69 percent of all housing in the City is at least 65 years old and more
     than a quarter of all units (27.4 percent) were built prior to 1939. Only six percent of the housing
     in East Grand Rapids has been constructed since 2000.

     This may account for the ranking of “property maintenance” as the fourth most signiﬁcant
     concern according to survey respondents. As an essentially built-out city, East Grand Rapids has
     no large expanse of open land to accommodate new development. The continued availability of
     quality housing will rely on individual home improvement to upgrade and repair existing homes
     and modiﬁcation of zoning regulations to allow inﬁll and conversion to other residential options.

Nonconforming Conditions
     Many of the City’s established neighborhoods were created long before any zoning regulation. In
     some areas, consistent with the trends of the times, homes were built on lots as small as or even
     smaller than 4,000 sq. ft.

     When zoning was eventually introduced, even the smallest required minimum lot size (5,000 sq.
     ft.) was larger than many of those pre-existing lots, making them nonconforming. Nearly all lots
     in some neighborhoods still remain nonconforming. The maps on the following page illustrate
     current zoning and the signiﬁcant concentrations of lots that do not meet zoning requirements for lot
     area and/or width throughout the City.

     While nonconforming lots are occupied by homes, they are subject to limitations not applicable to
     conforming lots. For example, the maximum allowed building height is less than that permitted
     on conforming lots. Limits on maximum coverage for buildings and pavement also make it diﬃcult,
     if not impossible, for such nonconforming lots to have a garage, accessory building, or patio.




                                                                                                      10
  Clusters of
Nonconforming
     Lots




                11
                           Vision and Goals
Vision
      East Grand Rapids will continue to be a highly desirable residential
    community. Its long-term sustainability will be maintained through an
    excellent school system, ongoing investment and enhancements in the
 Gaslight Village business district, a variety of housing options for current and
 future residents, ample preserved open spaces and parks, a comprehensive
  network of trails and pathways for all users, and superior public services.


Goals
     The ﬁndings and recommendations of this Plan amendment are consistent with and intended to
     support the goals of the 2018 Master Plan. The overarching theme for these goals is to support
     the Plan’s vision and retain the viability of the City’s distinct neighborhoods. Many of the goals
     listed below and in the 2018 Master Plan are aligned with goals more fully addressed in other
     City plans such as the Mobility/Bike Plan, Parks & Recreation Plan, and Climate Action Plan for
     City operations.


 • Increase the variety of housing options available to accommodate aging-in-
   place, new families, and young professionals at an attainable cost.
 • Expand the network of trails, pathways, and designated lanes for biking,
   walking, and running to create a “complete streets” mobility system.
 • Achieve universal accessibility throughout the City for those persons with
   mobility challenges.
 • Provide open spaces in Gaslight Village for social interaction and community
   events.
 • Enhance the image and vitality of Gaslight Village by promoting additional
   events, screening parking lots, encouraging more businesses, and
   promoting a walkable environment.
 • Preserve the City’s attractive, desirable neighborhoods through
   enforcement of property maintenance regulations; prompt repair of
   streets, sidewalks, and other infrastructure; and routine patrols by public
   safety oﬃcers.
 • Strive to achieve carbon neutrality for City operations by 2040.




                                                                                                    12
                              Subareas
The City’s 2018 Master Plan addressed some localized issues but is mainly a plan for the
community as a whole. Many of the recommendations found in that Plan have been
implemented or are currently being worked on, while others remain on the “to-do” list.
Therefore, this Plan is a supplement to the 2018 Plan and is more narrowly focused on a few
speciﬁc areas of the City. Four subareas were selected for a closer look based on their existing
character, age, proximity to other uses, susceptibility to external inﬂuences, and/or current mix
of uses.

Except for the Gaslight Village subarea, these are primarily mature residential neighborhoods,
each with its own character and attributes. Each subarea is described on the following pages.

Two of the subareas, Gaslight Village and St. Stephen neighborhood, include conceptual
development plans. No individual concept is being singled out and recommended. They are
presented as illustrations of what could be done consistent with the goals of this Plan and
addressing comments oﬀered by those who participated in the opinion survey and attended
neighborhood meetings. Any future development in either area is subject to the desires of the
property owner, the feasibility of the use, and zoning approval by the City.




                                                                                              13
Gaslight Village                                                   11
     Existing Conditions. The center of activity in the City is a vibrant mix of retail, restaurants, oﬃces,
     lakefront park, pathways, municipal services, schools, and residential options clustered around
     the Wealthy Street/Lakeside Drive intersection. Activity abounds throughout the “village” as
     residents and visitors shop at the many unique stores, enjoy a variety of dining options, relax in
     Collins Park, cast a lure on Reeds Lake, and walk their dogs or ride their bikes along the Reeds
     Lake Trail.

     A mix of homes, condominiums,
     and apartments surrounds the
     commercial core and the last
     remaining undeveloped parcel of
     signiﬁcant size in East Grand
     Rapids. Once occupied by an
     amusement park and later by a
     medical clinic, parking deck, and
     department store, the roughly
     eight and a half acre vacant site
     has been the subject of various
     redevelopment proposals since
     2004. Two commercial buildings,
     approximately 77,000 square feet,
     were developed along the
     Wealthy Street frontage as the
     first phase of an approved 2004
     plan. However, the remainder of
     the property awaits development.
     This site also wraps around the
     north and east sides of an existing
     retail shopping center, Gaslight
     Plaza.

     The shopping center, developed in
     1958 on about 3 acres, followed the prevalent development model of that period for shopping
     centers, setting the “L-shaped” building back from the street and creating a large parking lot in
     the foreground. While the center is successful and contains the City’s only grocery store, its
     suburban design is out of character with the pedestrian-oriented business district surrounding it.

     Business owners generally give high
     marks to Gaslight Village for its
     variety, charm, and level of activity.
     However, like “downtown” merchants
     elsewhere, they have expressed
     concern about parking. While this is
     often a matter of perception, to the
     business owners it can be very real.
     The 2018 Master Plan




                                                                                                         14
 included a parking study which concluded that parking was suﬃcient. However, the loss of a two-
 story parking structure coupled with the recently proposed development of the remaining vacant
 acreage will warrant another look. An updated study of all parking (public, private, and school)
 in Gaslight Village was conducted in May 2025. Its findings were consistent with the 2018 study.

 However, two significant developments are anticipated in Gaslight Village within the next few
 years, whose immediate and long-term impact on parking is uncertain. One project is an
 expansion of East Grand Rapids High School and the other is a mixed-use planned development.
 During the construction phases of these projects, some currently available parking will be lost
 and the parking demand resulting from completion of both developments needs to be studied.

 The availability of a large parcel within Gaslight Village, as well as the presence of the Gaslight
 Plaza, anchored by the City’s only grocery store, represent opportunities and challenges for the
 community.

 Approximately 20 years ago, the currently vacant property was acquired when the former
 Jacobsen’s Department Store closed. A mixed-use development proposal consisting of
 residential, oﬃce, and commercial uses was approved by the City and subsequently by the
 voters. However, only the ﬁrst phase, consisting of two buildings along Wealthy Street, was
 constructed prior to an economic downturn that halted continuation of the project. In
 subsequent years, revised plans were presented, though each time unanticipated events (COVID,
 high interest rates, recession, construction costs, market conditions, etc.) impeded moving
 forward. A new mixed-use concept plan was submitted for the site in 2024 and, after several
 revisions, was approved in 2025. Submittal of detailed final plans is expected in 2026.

 The other major component of
 this subarea, Gaslight Plaza,
 essentially a shopping center
 within the broader business
 district, has been part of the
 community for decades. Several
 small businesses are located
 here, as well as a large grocery
 store. The expansive parking lot
 in the foreground accommodates
 customers for the shopping
 center and other businesses.

Regardless of its success in
drawing customer traﬃc to the
entire business district, the Plaza is
basically a suburban strip center in
the midst of a downtown. While
most other businesses in the
Village line the adjacent sidewalk
and parking is either on the streets or concealed behind buildings, the Plaza parking lot dominates
the frontage.




                                                                                                 15
Despite its prominence in the community, the
business district lacks a sense of arrival at the
Wealthy and Lovett Street intersection. Less than a
block west of the Plaza, the business district abruptly
ends and Wealthy Street becomes a residential
street lined with stately homes. A d i s t i n c t
s y m b o l a t t h i s p o r t a l would enhance the
business district’s identity and create a formal entry.

Neighborhood Input. In 2024 a revised concept plan
was presented to the City for development of the
remaining eight-plus acre vacant site north and east of the Gaslight Plaza. Similar to the original
mixed-use development approved 20 years earlier, the new plan proposed more dwelling units
as well as more residential options along with increased commercial space and revisions to the
interior access and circulation system. The proposal generated almost immediate response from
the community – both in support and in opposition.

Much of the comment was in the context of the broader business district. While many people
expressed support for the development and the resulting availability of more commercial space
and additional housing opportunities, others were opposed to the scale of some buildings and
the impact on traﬃc and parking.

Relative to the overall business district, traﬃc congestion was identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant issue.
Linked to traﬃc was concern about conﬂicts between vehicles and cyclists or pedestrians. This
prompted many suggestions to separate vehicular and non-motorized traﬃc to reduce
congestion and improve safety. Other comments proposed more public spaces within the
business district for events, relaxation, and visual appeal. The image of the Gaslight Plaza was
also the subject of several comments noting the need for physical improvements to the building
and screening for the parking lot.

Potential Changes. Future plans for the vacant site adjacent to Gaslight Plaza have been
presented to the City and a concept plan was approved. Therefore, only a schematic layout is
shown here to illustrate the desired integration of the new development with potential changes
to the Gaslight Plaza. The attached concept sketches illustrate several possible and desirable
scenarios based on input from the community and the goals of the Master Plan. Key elements to
all are the retention of the grocery store, addition and/or replacement of commercial space,
creation of prominent open space, retention of parking, connectivity with the future adjacent
development, visual enhancement of the Wealthy Street frontage, and gateway identity. No one
concept is being advocated over another. All are dependent on the owners of the Plaza and the
individual businesses within the shopping center.




                                                                                                16
Renovation of the
existing shopping center,
new buildings along
Wealthy, parking lot
landscaping, pedestrian
link to adjacent uses




Renovated grocery, new
buildings along Wealthy,
retain some existing
commercial, public
plaza, parking lot
landscaping, reorient
parking, pedestrian links
to adjacent uses




                            17
Renovated grocery, new
buildings along Wealthy,
upper floor residential,
improved access from
Shopping Center Drive,
public plaza, pedestrian link
to adjacent uses, parking
lot landscaping, reorient
parking lot




  Renovated grocery, new
  buildings along Wealthy,
  improved access from
  Shopping Center Drive,
  public plaza, parking lot
  landscaping




                              18
Greenwood Neighborhood                                                 11
    Existing Conditions. Located just northwest of the Gaslight Village subarea, this small, well
    maintained neighborhood dates back to the early 1900s. Many of those initial homes remain,
    others have since been replaced. Stately trees dot the neighborhood adding to its character. For
    decades, however, the neighborhood has contained a mix of other uses, including professional
    oﬃces, retail, and multiple-family residential. The largest of these is a cluster of townhomes at
    the west end of the subarea. Three oﬃce buildings occupy the property immediately east of the
    townhomes. A mixed-use oﬃce/residence sits at the northwest corner of Lakeside Drive and
    Greenwood Avenue and a two-family dwelling is located on Lansing Street in the center of the
    otherwise single-family neighborhood.

    A range of uses also surrounds
    the neighborhood – mostly
    single-family homes to the north
    and west (plus a tract of vacant
    city-owned property), single- and
    two-family residences to the
    immediate south, and expansive
    city- owned open space to the
    east. Just to the southeast lies a
    portion of the vacant property
    proposed       for     mixed-use
    development as part of the City’s
    Gaslight Village commercial core.

    Typical of development patterns
    in the early to mid-1900s, the
    mix of uses within the
    neighborhood has existed for
    decades. One current oﬃce
    building even predates several
    neighborhood homes. Overall,
    there is a nearly 50/50 balance
    between single- family homes
    and other uses.

    Neighborhood Input. Despite
    the neighborhood’s current and long- standing variety of residential and nonresidential uses,
    most residents object to any further intrusion by non single-family homes. A few even suggest
    phasing out the existing oﬃces, condos, and rental units to replace them with traditional homes.
    While some others suggest that a mix of uses, especially residential variety, is desirable, the
    predominant sentiment is opposed.

    Other expressed concerns relate to traﬃc and the safety of pedestrians (especially children) and
    cyclists. Enforcement of traﬃc laws, adding sidewalks in certain locations, and reconﬁguring
    perceived dangerous intersections are among other frequent suggestions.




                                                                                                  19
   Potential Changes. On the face of it, this is clearly a mixed-use neighborhood. Its proximity to
   Gaslight Village and the mixed-residential uses along Lovett, coupled with the existing oﬃce and
   multi- family uses within the neighborhood, make it well-suited as a transition area between the
   current and anticipated development to the south and the larger neighborhoods to the north.
   Based on the proposed plans for the Gaslight Village expansion southeast of the neighborhood, the
   future use along Lakeside Drive would be residential in the form of a row of townhomes,
   complementing the already established land use pattern.

   At the present time, considering the anticipated Gaslight mixed-use development, any change to
   the Greenwood neighborhood seems premature. There is no immediate challenge that
   necessitates a change to its current character, though future development to the south or further
   changing conditions may warrant consideration of other uses.

St. Stephen Neighborhood                                            11

   Existing Conditions. Located at
   the western edge of the City, this
   predominantly single-family area
   surrounds St. Stephen Catholic
   church and school built in 1924. At
   the time of this construction, the
   neighborhood was new and
   growing. Today the streets are
   lined with attractive, well-
   maintained single-family homes.
   However, declining enrollments
   and shortage of teachers
   prompted the recent closing of
   the elementary school. Likewise,
   reductions in the number of
   parishioners and a shortage of
   priests has threatened the closing
   of the church and its consolidation
   with another nearby parish.

   Currently, only about 20 percent
   of the school building is occupied
   by non-proﬁt organizations who
   use the space intermittently two
   or three days each week. Fuller
   use of the space and the property
   is desired. The church may continue to be used for other purposes until long-term plans are
   finalized by the diocese.

   While the St. Stephen property is surrounded on all sides by homes, the homes along the west side
   of Gladstone Street abut the boundary line between East Grand Rapids and the City of Grand




                                                                                                 20
Rapids. Property in Grand Rapids adjacent to those homes is occupied by the Clark Retirement
Community and Clark Condominiums, a large complex of aging-in-place facilities for senior
residents.

Neighborhood Input. The loss of the school and church disappointed many of the neighbors and
concerns were expressed about the fate of the buildings and their surrounding property. One
nearly universal comment voiced by the surrounding neighbors is the importance of the school’s
play area and open space which for decades have served as a gathering place for area residents.

Opinions are split about whether the
school building, in particular, should
be retained and occupied by some
other use or should be razed and
replaced with new housing or a
neighborhood park.        Speciﬁcally,
acquisition by the East Grand Rapids
Public School District has been
advocated, though unlikely. Other
ideas for the building included
community day care, senior center,
recreation center, or community green space/neighborhood park.

Regardless of the property’s ultimate fate, there is widespread concern about on-street parking
which currently is in short supply and
would only worsen unless additional
oﬀ-street    parking     accompanies
whatever new uses replace the school
and ultimately the church. Concerns
about density were also voiced if some
form of residential use is to be
developed.

Potential Changes. A complicating
and potentially costly consideration
aﬀecting the future use of the school
building is its physical connection to the church. In addition to sharing a wall, the two buildings
share a mechanical system. Nevertheless, operating and maintaining the existing buildings is no
doubt a costly proposition without a fuller use of the facilities.

In addition to the suggestions proposed by neighbors, the school building or the property on
which the building currently sits aﬀords other possibilities consistent with the character of the
surrounding area and the goals of the Master Plan. Several development concepts are shown on
the following pages for the school property only (pending a final determination regarding the
church’s disposition). These are illustrative examples only. Implementation of any repurposing of
the existing building or redevelopment of the site is dependent upon economic feasibility, as well
as the willingness of the Diocese to allow such use(s) and the City’s approval of any necessary
zoning change. Note that, even where new development is illustrated, each concept includes
retaining play areas and gathering space as critical elements.



                                                                                                21
                        Retain existing buildings
                        and reuse for EGR
                        school or repurpose for
                        day care, community
                        center, senior housing,
                        or other institutional
                        use, and expand
                        playground/open
                        greenspace




Remove existing
buildings, add
townhomes, on- site
parking, playground,
basketball court, and
open greenspace




                           Remove existing buildings,
                           add single-family homes,
                           on-site parking,
                           playground, basketball
                           court, and open
                           greenspace




                                                    22
Remove buildings,
add townhomes, on-
site parking,
playground,
basketball court,
and large
greenspace




 Remove existing
 buildings, add
 playground,
 basketball court,
 community building,
 and expansive
 greenspace




                     23
Northwest Wealthy Neighborhood                                                  11
    Existing Conditions. Bounded
    on the north by Robinson
    Road and the south by Lake
    Drive, this is one of the City’s
    early neighborhoods. These
    blocks abut the City of Grand
    Rapids on the west, including
    its Eastown business district.
    Along the north edge is the
    sprawling Aquinas College
    campus and less than two
    blocks      east     of     the
    neighborhood is another large
    institutional use, Corewell
    Health-Blodgett Hospital.

     This is a stable, well-
     maintained neighborhood
     where most of the homes
     originate from the early
     1900s and are built on
     narrow lots of less than 5,000
     sq. ft. While the structures
     are predominantly single-
     family homes, two-family
     and multi-family buildings are found intermingled among the homes, especially south of Wealthy
     Street, a principal travel route serving the hospital and Gaslight Village, which essentially bisects
     the neighborhood. Most of these multi-unit structures, however, apparently predated zoning
     regulations and are considered nonconforming uses.

     Neighborhood Input. Overwhelmingly, the comments from residents of this area are positive.
     Its proximity to shopping, parks, and open space; its character and charm; and its walkability
     were cited over and over. According to current residents, there are few concerns despite the
     neighborhood’s proximity to the college and popular Eastown business district. The most
     frequently voiced issue related to the inconvenience created by the loss of on-street parking due
     to the few multi-family residences in the midst of the neighborhood and occasional events at the
     college. Other concerns related to enforcement of speed limits, maintenance and snow plowing
     of sidewalks, and lack of proactive enforcement of property maintenance codes for rental units.
     The need for designated crosswalks, especially along Wealthy Street, to improve safety and
     accommodate the many walkers in the area was also expressed.

     Potential Changes. Due in large part to issues related to on-street parking and maintenance of
     existing rental units, there is concern regarding potential expansion of multi-family zoning in the
     neighborhood, even for those properties that are already occupied by such uses. The small lot
     sizes also present an obstacle which could either preclude such multi-family uses due to their
     inability to meet minimum zoning requirements (though two-family conversions could be



                                                                                                       24
accommodated) or cause adjoining lots to be combined to allow construction of a new building
in place of the previously existing homes.

While rezoning the existing
nonconforming uses in the
midst of the neighborhood
south of Wealthy Street is not
recommended, a less intrusive
approach should be considered
in support of the Master Plan
goals to provide more housing
options in the community.
Expanding the existing MFR
(multi-family) zoning district
east along both sides of Wealthy
Street to Rosewood and
including         the       one
nonconforming multi-family use
at the southeast corner of
Wealthy and Rosewood would
limit these potential uses to a
major corridor, create a
reasonable transition from the
adjoining      Grand      Rapids
transitional zoning, remove one
nonconformity, provide more
opportunity for alternative
housing, and not intrude into
the heart of the neighborhood.

Such a change in zoning, while offering other options, would not automatically result in a sudden
conversion of existing homes into two-family or multi-family units. Evidence of this is found in
the existing MFR zoning district along Wealthy in which most of the properties have remained
occupied by single-family homes. A similar change was previously implemented along both sides
of Lovett Street west of Gaslight Village in which the R-3 single-family residential zoning was
changed to MFR. The change offered owners more options but has not resulted in widespread
conversions of homes into apartments.




                                                                                              25
                    Recommendations

1.  Explore potential options such as new zoning districts, amending current
    districts, and rezoning to alternate districts to provide greater ﬂexibility
    for use of nonconforming lots.
2. Increase opportunities for housing variety and attainability.
3. Consider a zoning ordinance amendment to allow administrative
    departures in lieu of variances for certain nonconforming conditions.
4. Review older neighborhoods and consider coverage and setback
    amendments in the R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts to allow accessory
    buildings such as detached garages.
5. Improve communication and outreach regarding enforcement of the City’s
    property maintenance code.
6. Create or enhance public spaces within Gaslight Village and Collins Park to
    accommodate more community events and highlight Reeds Lake as a
    prominent feature.
7. Work with owners and tenants of the Gaslight Village Plaza to promote
    inﬁll development along Wealthy street.
8. Enhance the western gateway into Gaslight Village to create a sense of
    arrival.
9. Work with the Rapid to expand transit routes, service, and convenience to
    reduce personal vehicle use.
10. Incorporate inclusive design of all public facilities to ensure accessibility
    for those with physical disabilities or age-related impairments.
11. Continue to implement other City plans including Parks and Recreation
    Plan, Mobility-Bike Action Plan, Climate Action Plan, and
    Utilities/Infrastructure Plans.




                                                                                26
                                     Zoning Plan
While the subarea plans are meant to offer reasonable development options for the specific areas,
implementation of some of those options would necessitate zoning changes to those properties. Likewise,
several Plan recommendations will require amendments to the zoning ordinance. The following table
highlights the potential zoning adjustments.

           Recommendation or Options                               Zoning Change
  Reduce nonconformities                           Amend existing districts or adopt new district
  Improve opportunities for expansion in mature
                                                   Amend existing districts or adopt new district
  neighborhoods
  Increase administrative approvals                Amend ZBA provisions and site plan text
  Expand housing options in Northwest Wealthy      Extend existing MFR zoning east along
  Neighborhood                                     Wealthy
  Provide additional housing in St. Stephen
                                                   Amend existing districts or adopt new district
  Neighborhood
                                                   Review zoning ordinance to ensure potential
  Redevelop Gaslight Village Plaza
                                                   uses and changes are permitted
  Increase opportunity for housing options         Amend zoning districts to allow more choice




                                                                                                    27
28
