 Judge rules resident petition valid, voiding approval for East Grand Rapids development | WGVU NEWS Skip to main content Search Query Show Search © 2026 WGVU Menu 95.3 / 88.5 FM Grand Rapids and 95.3 FM Muskegon Show Search Search Query Donate Play Live Radio Next Up: 0:00 0:00 0:00 0:00 Available On Air Stations On Air Now Playing WGVU FM All Streams News Judge rules resident petition valid, voiding approval for East Grand Rapids development WGVU News | By David Limbaugh Published August 11, 2026 at 2:53 PM EDT Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print Listen • 0:59 Integrated Architecture A major setback for the proposed Gaslight Village development in East Grand Rapids as a judge has ruled a resident protest petition valid, effectively voiding the city’s approval Circuit Court Judge George Quist ruled that the zoning protest petition signed by 1,500 East Grand Rapids’ residents opposed to a Gaslight Village mixed-use development is valid. The project was narrowly approved by the city commission last fall; however, this ruling invalidates that approval. Quist stated the petition was submitted in a timely manner and contained the required number of signatures of 20% or more. Under the petition, the commission was required to vote by a supermajority rather than a simple majority. Residents opposed to the development have maintained the project is too large and will change the character and safety of the community. A spokesperson for East Grand Rapids Responsible Development stated, “The developer must now submit a new and substantially different plan for approval, and the new plan must go through the entire approval process.” City Manager Shea Charles stated officials are reviewing the court’s decision with legal counsel and the commission will discuss the case in a closed session August 17 th . For a weekly dose of news right to your inbox, sign up for the WGVU newsletter . Tags News East Grand Rapids City of East Grand Rapids Gaslight Village Development City Manager ruling petition petition signitures Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print David Limbaugh Dave joined WGVU Public Media in November of 2023 after eighteen years as a Michigan Association of Broadcasters Emmy-nominated photojournalist and editor at Grand Rapids' WOOD TV8 and three years at WEYI TV25 in Flint, Michigan. As a General Assignment Reporter, Dave covers daily news and community events all over West Michigan. See stories by David Limbaugh Related Content News Gaslight Village development moves forward despite pushback and lawsuit from East Grand Rapids residents David Limbaugh The East Grand Rapids Planning Commission has approved Phase 1 of a major Gaslight Village mixed-use project despite an active lawsuit against the city Listen • 1:16 News East Grand Rapids residents sue city over blocked referendum on Gaslight Village redevelopment David Limbaugh A group of East Grand Rapids residents are suing the city, saying it unfairly blocked a referendum putting a redevelopment proposal to a community vote Listen • 1:12 